Block Grid Docs (#4398)
umbraco/UmbracoDocs: Fundamentals/Backoffice/Property-Editors/Built-in-Property-Editors/Block-Grid-Editor/index.md

Additionally, Blocks can nest other Blocks forming more complex or strict compositions.

The default provided layout mechanism is based on CSS Grids. This can be adjusted or replaced to achieve the right layout for your project.

## Configure the Block Grid

The Block Grid property editor is configured in the same way standard property editors, which is via the Data Types backoffice interface.

To set up your Block Grid Editor property, follow these steps:

1. Navigate to the **Settings** section in the Umbraco backoffice.
2. Locate and right-click the **Data Types** folder.
3. **Create a new Data Type**.
4. Select **Block Grid** from the list of available property editors.

You will see the configuration options for a Block Grid as shown below.

![Block Grid - Data Type Definition](images/BlockListEditor_DataType.jpg)
> TODO: screenshot

The Data Type editor allows you to configure the following properties:

> - **Available Blocks** - Define the Block Types to be available for use in the property. Read more on how to set up Block Types below.
> - **Amount** - Sets the minimum and/or maximum number of blocks that should be allowed in the root of the layout.
> - **Live editing mode** - Enabling this will enable you to see the changes you making as you are making them.
> - **Property editor width** - Overwrite the width of the property editor. This field takes any valid CSS value for "max-width".
> - **Grid Columns** - Define the number of columns in your grid layout. Default is 12 columns.
> - **Layout Stylesheet** - Replace the built-in Layout Stylesheet. Additionally you can retrieve the default layout stylesheet to use as base for your own or inspiration for writhing your own.

Reviewer: Updated the properties to match the Umbraco backoffice.
Also, **Create Button Label** appears in the backoffice but is not part of this list. Should it be added?

```suggestion
- **Blocks** - Define the Block Types to be available for use in the property. Read more on how to set up Block Types below.
- **Amount** - Sets the minimum and/or the maximum number of blocks that should be allowed at the root of the layout.
- **Live editing mode** - Enabling this will enable you to see the changes you make as you are making them.
- **Editor width** - Overwrite the width of the property editor. This field takes any valid CSS value for "max-width".
- **Grid Columns** - Define the number of columns in your grid layout. The default is 12 columns.
- **Layout Stylesheet** - Replace the built-in Layout Stylesheet. Additionally, you can retrieve the default layout stylesheet to use as a base for your own or inspiration for writing your own.
```

## Setup Block Types

> Block Types are based on **Element Types**. These can be created beforehand or while setting up your Block Types.

Reviewer: Do we need here to explain how to create an Element Type as a Block Type?

Author: We didn't do that in List, so I would say not needed.
But when that said it would be a nicer way for newcomers. So a link to an article on that would be great!

Reviewer: Noted 💪 
We have not documented Element Types yet, but I've added a task to our backlog.

- **Custom stylesheet** - Pick your own stylesheet to be used for this block in the Content editor. By adding a stylesheet the styling of this block will become scoped. This means that the default backoffice styles are no longer present for the view of this block.
- **Overlay editor size** - Set the size for the Content editor overlay for editing this block.

### Catalogue appearance

These properties refer to how the Block is presented in the Block catalogue when editors choose which Blocks to use for their content.

- **Background color** - Define a background color to be displayed beneath the icon or thumbnail. Example: `#424242`.
- **Icon color** - Change the color of the Element Type icon. Example: `#242424`.
- **Thumbnail** - Pick an image or SVG file to replace the icon of this Block in the catalogue.

The thumbnails for the catalogue are presented in the format of 16:10, and we recommend a resolution of 400px width and 250px height.

### Layout options

> **TO BE DONE**

Reviewer: Will you be writing this, or is this something we needs to help complete?

Author: This will have to be updated as UI is changed.
It could be done by you when you take screenshots?

Author: Ive added some about this

### Data Models

It is possible to use two separate Element Types for your Block Types. It is required to have one for Content and optional to add one for Settings.

- **Content model** - This presents the Element Type used as model for the Content section of this Block. This cannot be changed, but you can open the Element Type to perform edits or view the properties available. Useful when writing your Label.
- **Settings model** - Add a Settings section to your Block based on a given Element Type. When selected you can open the Element Type or choose to remove the Settings section again.

### Areas

> **TO BE DONE**

Reviewer: Will you be writing this, or is this something we needs to help complete?

Author: This will have to be updated as UI is changed.
It could be done by you when you take screenshots?

Author: Ive added some about this, also some comments for what to write more about.

The following is an example of a Partial View for a Block Type. It is important that the `MyElementTypeAliasOfContent`and `MyElementTypeAliasOfSettings` corresponds with the selected Element Type aliases for the given Content and Settings in your block.

```csharp
@inherits Umbraco.Cms.Web.Common.Views.UmbracoViewPage<Umbraco.Cms.Core.Models.Blocks.BlockGridItem>;
@using ContentModels = Umbraco.Cms.Web.Common.PublishedModels;
@{
    var content = (ContentModels.MyElementTypeAliasOfContent)Model.Content;
    var settings = (ContentModels.MyElementTypeAliasOfSettings)Model.Settings;
}

@* Render the value of field with alias 'heading' from the Element Type selected as Content section *@
<h1>@content.Value("heading")</h1>

@* Render the block areas *@
@await Html.GetBlockGridItemAreasHtmlAsync(Model)
```

You can simplify the property rendering using ModelsBuilder by replacing `@content.Value("heading")` with `@content.Heading`.

### 2. Build your own rendering

The built-in value converter for the Block Grid lets you use the block data as you like. Call the `Value<T>` method with a type of `BlockGridModel` to have the stored value returned as a `BlockGridModel` instance.

> `BlockGridModel` contains the Block Grid configuration (like the number of columns as `GridColumns`) whilst also being an implementation of `IEnumerable<BlockGridItem>` (see details for `BlockGridItem` above).

Reviewer: "See details for `BlockGridIte,` above".

Which section is this referring to? The section above this, is about another type of rendering - but, is that what this is referring to? 🤔

Author: Hmm, not sure. I think it should make sense when reading. If BlockGridItem isn't described above then that's a mistake. Whether it's needed to describe, or not, must be best for someone with C# skill to judge.
Do you have someone to verify what is needed?

Reviewer: We do not, unfortunately.

We'll have another look at the structure, once the PR is out of draft 💪 
I might very well have missed this!

---

> versionFrom: 9.0.0

Reviewer 2: @nielslyngsoe Is this going to be backported into Version 9 as well ?

Author: This is just for the custom views.

versionTo: 10.0.0
---

# Block Grid

`Alias: Umbraco.BlockGrid`

`Returns: BlockGridModel`

The **Block Grid** enables the editor to layout their content in the Umbraco backoffice. The content is made of blocks, which can contain simple or complex data.

A Block takes full width with the default setup.

> There is two ways a Block can become smaller. When a Block is placed in a Area it will fit to the Areas width, or a Block can have one or more Column Span Options defined, A single Column Span Option will be used to define the Blocks width. With multiple options the Content Editor can scale the Block to fit one of these options.

Reviewer: Note added directly to article as a TODO

The default provided layout mechanism is based on CSS Grid. This can be adjusted or replaced to achieve the right layout for your project.

## Configure the Block Grid

The Block Grid property editor is configured in the same way standard property editors, which is via the Data Types backoffice interface.

To set up your Block Grid Editor property, follow these steps:

1. Navigate to the **Settings** section in the Umbraco backoffice.
2. Locate and right-click the **Data Types** folder.
3. **Create a new Data Type**.
4. Select **Block Grid** from the list of available property editors.

You will see the configuration options for a Block Grid as shown below.

![Block Grid - Data Type Definition](images/BlockListEditor_DataType.jpg)
> TODO: screenshot

The Data Type editor allows you to configure the following properties:

- **Blocks** - Define the Block Types to be available for use in the property. Read more on how to set up Block Types below.
- **Amount** - Sets the minimum and/or the maximum number of blocks that should be allowed at the root of the layout.
- **Live editing mode** - Enabling this will enable you to see the changes you make as you are making them.

> - **Editor width** - Overwrite the width of the property editor. This field takes any valid CSS value for "max-width".

Reviewer 2: @nielslyngsoe I think the example should be expanded on to give examples such as `100% or 800px or 100vw`

Once you have added an Element Type as a Block Type on your Block Grid Data Type you have the option to configure it.

![Block List - Data Type Block Configuration](images/BlockListEditor_DataType_Blocks.png)
> TODO: screenshot

### Groups
Blocks can also be grouped, this will be visible in the Block Catalogue. This can also be used to allow a group of Blocks in a Area.

## Block Configuration
Each Block has a set of properties that are optional to configure. These are described below.

### General

Customize the user experience for your content editors when they work with the blocks in the Content section.

- **Label** - Define a label for the appearance of the Block in the editor. The label can use AngularJS template-string-syntax to display values of properties.
  :::tip
  Label example: "My Block {{myPropertyAlias}}" will be shown as: "My Block FooBar". 
  
  You can also use more advanced expression using AngularJS filters, like `{{myPropertyAlias | limitTo:100}}` or for a property using Richtext editor `{{myPropertyAlias | ncRichText | truncate:true:100}}`. It is also possible to use properties from the Settings model by using `{{$settings.propertyAlias}}`.

>   :::

Reviewer 2: Perhaps link to more documentation or the community blog post from Joe @nielslyngsoe & @sofietoft 
https://joe.gl/ombek/blog/umbraco-angularjs-filter-cheat-sheet/

Reviewer: Done 👍

- **Settings model** - Add a Settings section to your Block based on a given Element Type. When selected you can open the Element Type or choose to remove the Settings section again.
    
### Size options

Customize the Blocks size in the Grid, if you define multiple options the Block becomes scalable.

- **Available column spans i** - Define one or more columns this Block spans across. Example in a 12 columns grid, 6 columns is equivalent to half width. By enabling 6 columns and 12 columns, the Block can be scaled to either be half width or full width.
- **Available row spans i** - Define the amount of rows this Block spans across.

### Catalogue appearance

These properties refer to how the Block is presented in the Block catalogue when editors choose which Blocks to use for their content.

- **Background color** - Define a background color to be displayed beneath the icon or thumbnail. Example: `#424242`.
- **Icon color** - Change the color of the Element Type icon. Example: `#242424`.

> - **Thumbnail** - Pick an image or SVG file to replace the icon of this Block in the catalogue.

Reviewer 2: Nice. Never knew I could pick a custom SVG thats not registered via the usual way of the default icons or adding a custom one with the folder convention in App_Plugins - so good to see this documented 👍

**Create Button Label** is to overwrite the Create Button Label of that Area.

**Number of blocks** is for the total amount of Blocks in the Area.

**TODO...**
Mention that you can pick groups for allowance, in that case the required number is for Blocks of the group.
Mention that you can pick individual Blocks, this Block can be picked and will be valid though its not allow for Areas.
Individual Block validation(required number) is just for that block-type.

### Advanced

These properties are relevant when you working with custom views or complex projects.

- **Custom view** - Overwrite the AngularJS view for the block presentation in the Content editor. Use this to make a more visual presentation of the block or make your own editing experience by adding your own AngularJS controller to the view.

- **Custom stylesheet** - Pick your own stylesheet to be used for this block in the Content editor. By adding a stylesheet the styling of this block will become scoped. This means that the default backoffice styles are no longer present for the view of this block.

- **Overlay editor size** - Set the size for the Content editor overlay for editing this block.

> - **Hide content editor** - Use this feature when you want to hide the ability to edit the content in a Block Editor. If you made a custom view that enables you to edit the content part of a Block, you might want to use this feature.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure the copy for this @nielslyngsoe & @sofietoft reads right or is super clear, but may just be me...

Author: Okay, I changed it to this:

Hide the UI for editing the content in a Block Editor. This is only relevant if you made a custom view that provides the UI for editing of content.

## Editing Blocks

When viewing a **Block Grid** editor in the Content section for the first time, you will be presented with the option to Add content.

![Block List - Add Content](images/BlockListEditor_AddContent.png)
> TODO: screenshot

Clicking the Add content button brings up the **Block Catalogue**.

![Block List - Setup](images/BlockListEditor_BlockPicker_simplesetup.jpg)
> TODO: screenshot

> The Block Catalogue looks different depending on the amount of available Blocks and their catalogue appearance.

Reviewer 2: Don't forget to mention or update the screenshot as blocks can be organised into groups

Reviewer: All screenshots will be updated before we publish - hence all the "todo's" 😄

![Block List - example setup from Umbraco.com](images/BlockListEditor_BlockPicker.jpg)
> TODO: screenshot

Click the Block Type you wish to create and a new Block will appear in the layout.

More Blocks can be added to the layout by clicking the Add content button. Alternatively, use the Add content button that appears on hover to add new blocks between, besides or above existing Blocks.

![Block List - Add Content](images/BlockListEditor_AddContentInline.jpg)
> TODO: screenshot

> Blocks can be rearranged using the click and drag feature. Move them up or down to place them in the desired order.

Reviewer 2: Add a note or tip to help mention that the grid can be configured to not allow blocks to be dropped in certain locations and will visually turn red @nielslyngsoe `

Reviewer 2: You also need to mention the use of force left and force right and resizing blocks in an area with the resize handle.

Author: Okay, i have noted it.

To delete a Block click the trashbin icon whichs appears on hover.

## Rendering Block Grid Content

Rendering the stored value of your **Block Grid** property can be done in two ways: 

1.  [Default rendering](#1-default-rendering)
2.  [Build your own rendering](#2-build-your-own-rendering)

### 1. Default rendering

You can choose to use the built-in rendering mechanism for rendering blocks using a Partial View for each block.

The default rendering method is named `GetBlockGridHtmlAsync()` and comes with a few options.

Example use-case:

```csharp

> @await Html.GetBlockGridHtmlAsync(Model, myGrid")

Reviewer 2: Typo missing "
`@await Html.GetBlockGridHtmlAsync(Model, "myGrid")`

Author: Good one

```

In the sample above `"myGrid"` is the alias of the Block Grid editor.

If you are using ModelsBuilder, the example will look like this:

Example:

```csharp
@await Html.GetBlockGridHtmlAsync(Model.MyGrid)
```

To use the `GetBlockGridHtmlAsync()` method you will need to create a Partial View for each Block Type. The Partial View must be named using the alias of the Element Type that is being used as Content Model for the Block Type.

These Partial View files need to go into the `Views/Partials/BlockGrid/Components/` folder.

Example: `Views/Partials/BlockGrid/Components/MyElementTypeAliasOfContent.cshtml`.

> The Partial Views will receive a model of type `Umbraco.Core.Models.Blocks.BlockGridItem`. This model contains `Content` and `Settings` from your block, as well as the configured `RowSpan`, `ColumnSpan`, `ForceLeft`, `ForceRight` and `Areas` of the block.

Reviewer 2: Perhaps a screenshot or a codeblock showing what the Model contains @sofietoft & @nielslyngsoe 
For example a screenshot of the debugger with values shown for the properties to help understand what is available to use.

Reviewer: I am not entirely sure I understand what you mean, @warrenbuckley ? 🤔 
Which debugger is this, and how do I use it? (perhaps we already have docs on it, but just wanted to check)

Reviewer 2: Sorry @sofietoft I just meant use say Visual Studio debugger with a breakpoint on the razor view and with a watch in the debugger showing some of the values.

Reviewer: Ah, alrighty! Perhaps you'd be up for adding something like that? Or perhaps do it, send me the screendump, and I'll add it to the article?
Sorry, I wouldn't really know where to even start using the debugger 🙈
